### Getting and Cleaning Data Class Project

Features included in the dataset generated by `run_analysis.R` (**getdata-project-ph.txt**) are a subset of the features in the **"Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones dataset"** provided for the assignment.

The data has been tidied and is in a wide format. There are **68 columns** and **180 rows**. Each row contains an **Activity** name, a **Subject** number and values for **66 features**. Each value is the average for observations for that column's feature for a given **Activity** and **Subject**. Feature columns (*or feature variables*) are are subset from the full array of features provided in the original dataset and include only the `mean()` and `std()` (*standard deviation*) measurements for each of 17 given signals, including any separated XYZ vectors (more information about supplied features in section '**Features**' below).

#### Files in source dataset

The original UCI HAR Dataset components used were:

- **activity_labels.txt** *character* Value index (numbers,names) for activities (6,2)
- **features.txt** *character* Value index (numbers,names) for features (561,2)
- **test/subject_test.txt** *integer* Subject index for each test observation (2947,1)
- **test/X_test.txt** *numeric* Test observations for each feature (2947,561)
- **test/y_test.txt** *integer* Activity numbers for each test observation (2947,1)
- **train/subject_train.txt** *integer* Subject index for each training observation (7352,1)
- **train/X_train.txt** *numeric* Training observations for each feature (7352,561)
- **train/y_train.txt** *integer* Activity numbers for each training observation (7352,1)

(*Inertial Signals raw data was ingored as it was not relavent to the current task*)


#### Variables

There are two identification variables, Subject and Activity.

- **Subject** 
    *integer* (1:30). Represents 30 test subjects. 
    Derived from training and test files.
- **Activity** *character* (WALKING, WALKING\_UPSTAIRS, WALKING\_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING). 
    One of six activities recorded.
    Each subject has observations for each activity.
    The activity data in the original set was supplied as integers. 
    Supplied activity table was merged with the complete dataset and then the integers were removed from results.


There are an additional 66 **feature** variables for mean and standard deviation observed features of the accelerometer data (*described in 'Features' below*). 

#### Transformations

The output of analyze() in the run_analysis.R script is a table containing rows of subjects, activities and the applied mean for each selected feature in that subject/activity pair. 

- **Subjects** were read in as *integers* and were not modified.
- **Activities** were read in as *integers* and merged with provided index after other data was bound
- **features** were read in as *numeric* and grouped and averaged as *numeric*. IE: All rows containing `Subject 1, Activity: 'WALKING'` are grouped and each feature is averaged to creat a row for that subject/activity pair. The feature variable names were slighly changed when applied as column names in the data tables (*illegal characters were replaced with '.' *`tBodyAcc-mean()-X` to `tBodyAcc.mean...X`*)


#### Features:
(*this section is snipped and edited from the original provided with the UCI HAR dataset*)

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

#### Feature Selection:

The subset of variables that were estimated from each of these signals and included in this dataset are those containing: 

- `mean()`: Mean value
- `std()`: Standard deviation

(*all other values, including `meanFreq()` are ignored and set aside*)

Complete list of selected feature variables:

   tBodyAcc.mean...X,tBodyAcc.mean...Y,tBodyAcc.mean...Z,
   tGravityAcc.mean...X,tGravityAcc.mean...Y,tGravityAcc.mean...Z,
   tBodyAccJerk.mean...X,tBodyAccJerk.mean...Y,tBodyAccJerk.mean...Z,
   tBodyGyro.mean...X,tBodyGyro.mean...Y,tBodyGyro.mean...Z,
   tBodyGyroJerk.mean...X,tBodyGyroJerk.mean...Y,tBodyGyroJerk.mean...Z,
   tBodyAccMag.mean..,tGravityAccMag.mean..,tBodyAccJerkMag.mean..,
   tBodyGyroMag.mean..,tBodyGyroJerkMag.mean..,fBodyAcc.mean...X,
   fBodyAcc.mean...Y,fBodyAcc.mean...Z,fBodyAccJerk.mean...X,
   fBodyAccJerk.mean...Y,fBodyAccJerk.mean...Z,fBodyGyro.mean...X,
   fBodyGyro.mean...Y,fBodyGyro.mean...Z,fBodyAccMag.mean..,
   fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.mean..,fBodyBodyGyroMag.mean..,
   fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.mean..,tBodyAcc.std...X,tBodyAcc.std...Y,
   tBodyAcc.std...Z,tGravityAcc.std...X,tGravityAcc.std...Y,
   tGravityAcc.std...Z,tBodyAccJerk.std...X,tBodyAccJerk.std...Y,
   tBodyAccJerk.std...Z,tBodyGyro.std...X,tBodyGyro.std...Y,
   tBodyGyro.std...Z,tBodyGyroJerk.std...X,tBodyGyroJerk.std...Y,
   tBodyGyroJerk.std...Z,tBodyAccMag.std..,tGravityAccMag.std..,
   tBodyAccJerkMag.std..,tBodyGyroMag.std..,tBodyGyroJerkMag.std..,
   fBodyAcc.std...X,fBodyAcc.std...Y,fBodyAcc.std...Z,fBodyAccJerk.std...X,
   fBodyAccJerk.std...Y,fBodyAccJerk.std...Z,fBodyGyro.std...X,
   fBodyGyro.std...Y,fBodyGyro.std...Z,fBodyAccMag.std..,
   fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.std..,fBodyBodyGyroMag.std..,fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.std..

   

#### Notes on the dataset
(*this section is snipped from the original provided with the UCI HAR dataset*)

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING\_UPSTAIRS, WALKING\_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

**For each record it is provided:**

- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
- Its activity label. 
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.


**Notes:**

- Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].
- Each feature vector is a row on the text file.
